.TH RUSTI "1" "July 2013" "rusti 0.7" "User Commands"
\" Macros
..
.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text                                                   
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text                                                     
.ft R
.fi
..
.SH NAME
rusti \- Rust interactive shell

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rusti

.SH DESCRIPTION

This program is a REPL (Read-Eval-Print Loop) for the Rust language, available
at <\fBhttps://www.rust-lang.org\fR>. It provides an interactive shell to
evaluate Rust expressions, functions and code snippets, and to experiment with
Rust code.

.B WARNING:
The Rust REPL is experimental and may be unstable. If you encounter problems,
please use the compiler instead.

.SH OPTIONS

Currently none.

.SH SPECIAL COMMANDS

The interactive shell evaluates all input as a sequence of Rust expressions,
except for a set of special commands prefixed by a colon ':'. These special
commands are described below:

.TP
\fB:help\fR
Display a summary of available commands.
.TP
\fB:{\\n ..lines.. \\n:}\\n\fR
execute multiline command
.TP
\fB:load <crate> ...\fR
loads given crates as dynamic libraries
.TP
\fB:clear\fR
clear the bindings
.TP
\fB:exit\fR
exit from the repl

.SH "EXAMPLES"

A simple example session, declaring a variable, defining a function,
evaluating an expression and printing the result:

.PP
.Vb
\&	\fBrusti>\fR let x = 42;
\&	\fBrusti>\fR fn square(n: int) -> int { n*n }
\&	\fBrusti>\fR println(fmt!("%d squared is %d", x, square(x)));
\&	42 squared is 1764
.Ve

.SH "SEE ALSO"

rust, rustc, rustdoc, rustpkg

.SH "BUGS"
See <\fBhttps://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues\fR> for issues.

.SH "AUTHOR"
See \fBAUTHORS.txt\fR in the rust source distribution. Graydon Hoare
<\fIgraydon@mozilla.com\fR> is the project leader.

.SH "COPYRIGHT"
This work is dual-licensed under Apache 2.0 and MIT terms.  See \fBCOPYRIGHT\fR
file in the rust source distribution.
