src/doc/rustdoc/src/write-documentation/linking-to-items-by-name.md, before:

# Linking to items by name

Rustdoc is capable of directly linking to other rustdoc pages using the path of
the item as a link. This is referred to as an 'intra-doc link'.

For example, in the following code all of the links will link to the rustdoc page for `Bar`:

```rust
/// This struct is not [Bar]
pub struct Foo1;

/// This struct is also not [bar](Bar)
pub struct Foo2;

/// This struct is also not [bar][b]
///
/// [b]: Bar
pub struct Foo3;

/// This struct is also not [`Bar`]
pub struct Foo4;

/// This struct *is* [`Bar`]!
pub struct Bar;
```

Unlike normal Markdown, `[bar][Bar]` syntax is also supported without needing a
`[Bar]: ...` reference link.

Backticks around the link will be stripped, so ``[`Option`]`` will correctly
link to `Option`.

## Valid links

You can refer to anything in scope, and use paths, including `Self`, `self`, `super`, and
`crate`. Associated items (functions, types, and constants) are supported, but [not for blanket
trait implementations][#79682]. Rustdoc also supports linking to all primitives listed in
[the standard library documentation](../../std/index.html#primitives).

[#79682]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/79682

You can also refer to items with generic parameters like `Vec<T>`. The link will
resolve as if you had written ``[`Vec<T>`](Vec)``. Fully-qualified syntax (for example,
`<Vec as IntoIterator>::into_iter()`) is [not yet supported][fqs-issue], however.

[fqs-issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/74563

```rust,edition2018
use std::sync::mpsc::Receiver;

/// This is a version of [`Receiver<T>`] with support for [`std::future`].
///
/// You can obtain a [`std::future::Future`] by calling [`Self::recv()`].
pub struct AsyncReceiver<T> {
    sender: Receiver<T>
}

impl<T> AsyncReceiver<T> {
    pub async fn recv() -> T {
        unimplemented!()
    }
}
```

Rustdoc allows using URL fragment specifiers, just like a normal link:

```rust
/// This is a special implementation of [positional parameters].
///
/// [positional parameters]: std::fmt#formatting-parameters
struct MySpecialFormatter;
```

## Namespaces and Disambiguators

Paths in Rust have three namespaces: type, value, and macro. Item names must be unique within
their namespace, but can overlap with items in other namespaces. In case of ambiguity,
rustdoc will warn about the ambiguity and suggest a disambiguator.

```rust
/// See also: [`Foo`](struct@Foo)
struct Bar;

/// This is different from [`Foo`](fn@Foo)
struct Foo {}

fn Foo() {}
```

These prefixes will be stripped when displayed in the documentation, so `[struct@Foo]` will be
rendered as `Foo`. The following prefixes are available: `struct`, `enum`, `trait`, `union`,
`mod`, `module`, `const`, `constant`, `fn`, `function`, `field`, `variant`, `method`, `derive`,
`type`, `value`, `macro`, `prim` or `primitive`.

You can also disambiguate for functions by adding `()` after the function name,
or for macros by adding `!` after the macro name. The macro `!` can be followed by `()`, `{}`,
or `[]`. Example:

```rust
/// This is different from [`foo!()`].
fn foo() {}

/// This is different from [`foo()`]
macro_rules! foo {
  () => {}
}
```

There is one case where the disambiguation will be performed automatically: if an intra doc
link is resolved at the same time as a trait and as a derive proc-macro. In this case, it'll
always generate a link to the trait and not emit a "missing disambiguation" warning. A good
example of this case is when you link to the `Clone` trait: there is also a `Clone`
proc-macro but it ignores it in this case. If you want to link to the proc-macro, you can
use the `macro@` disambiguator.

## Warnings, re-exports, and scoping

Links are resolved in the scope of the module where the item is defined, even
when the item is re-exported. If a link from another crate fails to resolve, no
warning is given.

```rust,edition2018
mod inner {
    /// Link to [f()]
    pub struct S;
    pub fn f() {}
}
pub use inner::S; // the link to `f` will still resolve correctly
```

When re-exporting an item, rustdoc allows adding additional documentation to it.
That additional documentation will be resolved in the scope of the re-export, not
the original, allowing you to link to items in the new crate. The new links
will still give a warning if they fail to resolve.

```rust
/// See also [foo()]
pub use std::process::Command;

pub fn foo() {}
```

This is especially useful for proc-macros, which must always be defined in their own dedicated crate.

Note: Because of how `macro_rules!` macros are scoped in Rust, the intra-doc links of a
`macro_rules!` macro will be resolved [relative to the crate root][#72243], as opposed to the
module it is defined in.

If links do not look 'sufficiently like' an intra-doc link, they will be ignored and no warning
will be given, even if the link fails to resolve. For example, any link containing `/` or `[]`
characters will be ignored.

[#72243]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/72243

## What happens in case an intra-doc link cannot be generated

In some cases (items behind a `cfg` for example), an intra-doc link cannot be generated to item.
There are different ways to create a link in markdown, and depending on the one you use, it will
render differently in this case:

```md
1. [a]
2. [b][c]
3. [d](e)
4. [f]

[f]: g
```

`1.` and `2.` will be displayed as is in the rendered documentation (ie, `[a]` and `[b][c]`)
whereas `3.` and `4.` will be replaced by a link targeting `e` for `[d](e)` and `g` for `[f]`.

Commit message:

Add documentation for new `example` intra-doc link disambiguator

src/doc/rustdoc/src/write-documentation/linking-to-items-by-name.md, after:

# Linking to items by name

Rustdoc is capable of directly linking to other rustdoc pages using the path of
the item as a link. This is referred to as an 'intra-doc link'.

For example, in the following code all of the links will link to the rustdoc page for `Bar`:

```rust
/// This struct is not [Bar]
pub struct Foo1;

/// This struct is also not [bar](Bar)
pub struct Foo2;

/// This struct is also not [bar][b]
///
/// [b]: Bar
pub struct Foo3;

/// This struct is also not [`Bar`]
pub struct Foo4;

/// This struct *is* [`Bar`]!
pub struct Bar;
```

Unlike normal Markdown, `[bar][Bar]` syntax is also supported without needing a
`[Bar]: ...` reference link.

Backticks around the link will be stripped, so ``[`Option`]`` will correctly
link to `Option`.

## Valid links

You can refer to anything in scope, and use paths, including `Self`, `self`, `super`, and
`crate`. Associated items (functions, types, and constants) are supported, but [not for blanket
trait implementations][#79682]. Rustdoc also supports linking to all primitives listed in
[the standard library documentation](../../std/index.html#primitives).

[#79682]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/79682

You can also refer to items with generic parameters like `Vec<T>`. The link will
resolve as if you had written ``[`Vec<T>`](Vec)``. Fully-qualified syntax (for example,
`<Vec as IntoIterator>::into_iter()`) is [not yet supported][fqs-issue], however.

[fqs-issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/74563

```rust,edition2018
use std::sync::mpsc::Receiver;

/// This is a version of [`Receiver<T>`] with support for [`std::future`].
///
/// You can obtain a [`std::future::Future`] by calling [`Self::recv()`].
pub struct AsyncReceiver<T> {
    sender: Receiver<T>
}

impl<T> AsyncReceiver<T> {
    pub async fn recv() -> T {
        unimplemented!()
    }
}
```

Rustdoc allows using URL fragment specifiers, just like a normal link:

```rust
/// This is a special implementation of [positional parameters].
///
/// [positional parameters]: std::fmt#formatting-parameters
struct MySpecialFormatter;
```

## Namespaces and Disambiguators

Paths in Rust have three namespaces: type, value, and macro. Item names must be unique within
their namespace, but can overlap with items in other namespaces. In case of ambiguity,
rustdoc will warn about the ambiguity and suggest a disambiguator.

```rust
/// See also: [`Foo`](struct@Foo)
struct Bar;

/// This is different from [`Foo`](fn@Foo)
struct Foo {}

fn Foo() {}
```

These prefixes will be stripped when displayed in the documentation, so `[struct@Foo]` will be
rendered as `Foo`. The following prefixes are available: `struct`, `enum`, `trait`, `union`,
`mod`, `module`, `const`, `constant`, `fn`, `function`, `field`, `variant`, `method`, `derive`,
`type`, `value`, `macro`, `prim` or `primitive`.

There is another disambiguator available: `example`. If you want more information about this one,
take a look at the [scraped examples chapter](../scraped-examples.md).

You can also disambiguate for functions by adding `()` after the function name,
or for macros by adding `!` after the macro name. The macro `!` can be followed by `()`, `{}`,
or `[]`. Example:

```rust
/// This is different from [`foo!()`].
fn foo() {}

/// This is different from [`foo()`]
macro_rules! foo {
  () => {}
}
```

There is one case where the disambiguation will be performed automatically: if an intra doc
link is resolved at the same time as a trait and as a derive proc-macro. In this case, it'll
always generate a link to the trait and not emit a "missing disambiguation" warning. A good
example of this case is when you link to the `Clone` trait: there is also a `Clone`
proc-macro but it ignores it in this case. If you want to link to the proc-macro, you can
use the `macro@` disambiguator.

## Warnings, re-exports, and scoping

Links are resolved in the scope of the module where the item is defined, even
when the item is re-exported. If a link from another crate fails to resolve, no
warning is given.

```rust,edition2018
mod inner {
    /// Link to [f()]
    pub struct S;
    pub fn f() {}
}
pub use inner::S; // the link to `f` will still resolve correctly
```

When re-exporting an item, rustdoc allows adding additional documentation to it.
That additional documentation will be resolved in the scope of the re-export, not
the original, allowing you to link to items in the new crate. The new links
will still give a warning if they fail to resolve.

```rust
/// See also [foo()]
pub use std::process::Command;

pub fn foo() {}
```

This is especially useful for proc-macros, which must always be defined in their own dedicated crate.

Note: Because of how `macro_rules!` macros are scoped in Rust, the intra-doc links of a
`macro_rules!` macro will be resolved [relative to the crate root][#72243], as opposed to the
module it is defined in.

If links do not look 'sufficiently like' an intra-doc link, they will be ignored and no warning
will be given, even if the link fails to resolve. For example, any link containing `/` or `[]`
characters will be ignored.

[#72243]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/72243

## What happens in case an intra-doc link cannot be generated

In some cases (items behind a `cfg` for example), an intra-doc link cannot be generated to item.
There are different ways to create a link in markdown, and depending on the one you use, it will
render differently in this case:

```md
1. [a]
2. [b][c]
3. [d](e)
4. [f]

[f]: g
```

`1.` and `2.` will be displayed as is in the rendered documentation (ie, `[a]` and `[b][c]`)
whereas `3.` and `4.` will be replaced by a link targeting `e` for `[d](e)` and `g` for `[f]`.
