src/doc/rustc-dev-guide/src/rustc-driver-getting-diagnostics.md, before:

# Example: Getting diagnostic through `rustc_interface`

`rustc_interface` allows you to intercept diagnostics that would otherwise be printed to stderr.

## Getting diagnostics

To get diagnostics from the compiler, 
configure `rustc_interface::Config` to output diagnostic to a buffer, 
and run `TyCtxt.analysis`:

```rust
// See https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/blob/master/examples/rustc-driver-getting-diagnostics.rs for complete program.
let buffer = sync::Arc::new(sync::Mutex::new(Vec::new()));
let config = rustc_interface::Config {
    opts: config::Options {
        // Configure the compiler to emit diagnostics in compact JSON format.
        error_format: config::ErrorOutputType::Json {
            pretty: false,
            json_rendered: rustc_errors::emitter::HumanReadableErrorType::Default(
                rustc_errors::emitter::ColorConfig::Never,
            ),
        },
        /* other config */
    },
    // Redirect the diagnostic output of the compiler to a buffer.
    diagnostic_output: rustc_session::DiagnosticOutput::Raw(Box::from(DiagnosticSink(
        buffer.clone(),
    ))),
    /* other config */
};
rustc_interface::run_compiler(config, |compiler| {
    compiler.enter(|queries| {
        queries.global_ctxt().unwrap().take().enter(|tcx| {
            // Run the analysis phase on the local crate to trigger the type error.
            tcx.analysis(rustc_hir::def_id::LOCAL_CRATE);
        });
    });
});
// Read buffered diagnostics.
let diagnostics = String::from_utf8(buffer.lock().unwrap().clone()).unwrap();
```

Commit message:

Add notes about nightly rustc version for the rustc-driver examples

src/doc/rustc-dev-guide/src/rustc-driver-getting-diagnostics.md, after:

# Example: Getting diagnostic through `rustc_interface`

`rustc_interface` allows you to intercept diagnostics that would otherwise be printed to stderr.

## Getting diagnostics

To get diagnostics from the compiler,
configure `rustc_interface::Config` to output diagnostic to a buffer,
and run `TyCtxt.analysis`. The following should be compiled
with <!-- date: 2021-03 --> `nightly-2021-03-28` (See [here][example]
for the complete example):

[example]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rustc-dev-guide/blob/master/examples/rustc-driver-getting-diagnostics.rs

```rust
let buffer = sync::Arc::new(sync::Mutex::new(Vec::new()));
let config = rustc_interface::Config {
    opts: config::Options {
        // Configure the compiler to emit diagnostics in compact JSON format.
        error_format: config::ErrorOutputType::Json {
            pretty: false,
            json_rendered: rustc_errors::emitter::HumanReadableErrorType::Default(
                rustc_errors::emitter::ColorConfig::Never,
            ),
        },
        /* other config */
    },
    // Redirect the diagnostic output of the compiler to a buffer.
    diagnostic_output: rustc_session::DiagnosticOutput::Raw(Box::from(DiagnosticSink(
        buffer.clone(),
    ))),
    /* other config */
};
rustc_interface::run_compiler(config, |compiler| {
    compiler.enter(|queries| {
        queries.global_ctxt().unwrap().take().enter(|tcx| {
            // Run the analysis phase on the local crate to trigger the type error.
            tcx.analysis(rustc_hir::def_id::LOCAL_CRATE);
        });
    });
});
// Read buffered diagnostics.
let diagnostics = String::from_utf8(buffer.lock().unwrap().clone()).unwrap();
```
