docs/user/generated_config.adoc, before:

[[rust-analyzer.assist.importMergeBehavior]]rust-analyzer.assist.importMergeBehavior (default: `"full"`)::
 The strategy to use when inserting new imports or merging imports.
[[rust-analyzer.assist.importPrefix]]rust-analyzer.assist.importPrefix (default: `"plain"`)::
 The path structure for newly inserted paths to use.
[[rust-analyzer.callInfo.full]]rust-analyzer.callInfo.full (default: `true`)::
 Show function name and docs in parameter hints.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.autoreload]]rust-analyzer.cargo.autoreload (default: `true`)::
 Automatically refresh project info via `cargo metadata` on  `Cargo.toml` changes.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures]]rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures (default: `false`)::
 Activate all available features (`--all-features`).
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.features]]rust-analyzer.cargo.features (default: `[]`)::
 List of features to activate.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts]]rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts (default: `false`)::
 Run build scripts (`build.rs`) for more precise code analysis.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.noDefaultFeatures]]rust-analyzer.cargo.noDefaultFeatures (default: `false`)::
 Do not activate the `default` feature.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.target]]rust-analyzer.cargo.target (default: `null`)::
 Compilation target (target triple).
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.noSysroot]]rust-analyzer.cargo.noSysroot (default: `false`)::
 Internal config for debugging, disables loading of sysroot crates.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.enable]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.enable (default: `true`)::
 Run specified `cargo check` command for diagnostics on save.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allFeatures]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allFeatures (default: `null`)::
 Check with all features (`--all-features`).  Defaults to `#rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allTargets]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allTargets (default: `true`)::
 Check all targets and tests (`--all-targets`).
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.command]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.command (default: `"check"`)::
 Cargo command to use for `cargo check`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.noDefaultFeatures]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.noDefaultFeatures (default: `null`)::
 Do not activate the `default` feature.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.target]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.target (default: `null`)::
 Check for a specific target. Defaults to  `#rust-analyzer.cargo.target#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.extraArgs]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.extraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Extra arguments for `cargo check`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.features]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.features (default: `null`)::
 List of features to activate. Defaults to  `#rust-analyzer.cargo.features#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.overrideCommand]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.overrideCommand (default: `null`)::
 Advanced option, fully override the command rust-analyzer uses for  checking. The command should include `--message-format=json` or  similar option.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.addCallArgumentSnippets]]rust-analyzer.completion.addCallArgumentSnippets (default: `true`)::
 Whether to add argument snippets when completing functions.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.addCallParenthesis]]rust-analyzer.completion.addCallParenthesis (default: `true`)::
 Whether to add parenthesis when completing functions.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.postfix.enable]]rust-analyzer.completion.postfix.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show postfix snippets like `dbg`, `if`, `not`, etc.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.autoimport.enable]]rust-analyzer.completion.autoimport.enable (default: `true`)::
 Toggles the additional completions that automatically add imports when completed.  Note that your client must specify the `additionalTextEdits` LSP client capability to truly have this feature enabled.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enable]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show native rust-analyzer diagnostics.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enableExperimental]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enableExperimental (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show experimental rust-analyzer diagnostics that might  have more false positives than usual.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.disabled]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.disabled (default: `[]`)::
 List of rust-analyzer diagnostics to disable.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsHint]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsHint (default: `[]`)::
 List of warnings that should be displayed with info severity.\n\nThe  warnings will be indicated by a blue squiggly underline in code and  a blue icon in the `Problems Panel`.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsInfo]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsInfo (default: `[]`)::
 List of warnings that should be displayed with hint severity.\n\nThe  warnings will be indicated by faded text or three dots in code and  will not show up in the `Problems Panel`.
[[rust-analyzer.files.watcher]]rust-analyzer.files.watcher (default: `"client"`)::
 Controls file watching implementation.
[[rust-analyzer.files.excludeDirs]]rust-analyzer.files.excludeDirs (default: `[]`)::
 These directories will be ignored by rust-analyzer.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.debug]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.debug (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Debug` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show HoverActions in Rust files.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.gotoTypeDef]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.gotoTypeDef (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Go to Type Definition` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.implementations]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.implementations (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Implementations` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.run]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.run (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Run` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.linksInHover]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.linksInHover (default: `true`)::
 Use markdown syntax for links in hover.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.chainingHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.chainingHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show inlay type hints for method chains.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.maxLength]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.maxLength (default: `null`)::
 Maximum length for inlay hints. Default is unlimited.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.parameterHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.parameterHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show function parameter name inlay hints at the call  site.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.typeHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.typeHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show inlay type hints for variables.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.debug]]rust-analyzer.lens.debug (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Debug` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.enable]]rust-analyzer.lens.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show CodeLens in Rust files.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.implementations]]rust-analyzer.lens.implementations (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Implementations` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.run]]rust-analyzer.lens.run (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Run` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.methodReferences]]rust-analyzer.lens.methodReferences (default: `false`)::
 Whether to show `Method References` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.references]]rust-analyzer.lens.references (default: `false`)::
 Whether to show `References` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.linkedProjects]]rust-analyzer.linkedProjects (default: `[]`)::
 Disable project auto-discovery in favor of explicitly specified set  of projects.\n\nElements must be paths pointing to `Cargo.toml`,  `rust-project.json`, or JSON objects in `rust-project.json` format.
[[rust-analyzer.lruCapacity]]rust-analyzer.lruCapacity (default: `null`)::
 Number of syntax trees rust-analyzer keeps in memory. Defaults to 128.
[[rust-analyzer.notifications.cargoTomlNotFound]]rust-analyzer.notifications.cargoTomlNotFound (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `can't find Cargo.toml` error message.
[[rust-analyzer.procMacro.enable]]rust-analyzer.procMacro.enable (default: `false`)::
 Enable support for procedural macros, implies `#rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts#`.
[[rust-analyzer.procMacro.server]]rust-analyzer.procMacro.server (default: `null`)::
 Internal config, path to proc-macro server executable (typically,  this is rust-analyzer itself, but we override this in tests).
[[rust-analyzer.runnables.overrideCargo]]rust-analyzer.runnables.overrideCargo (default: `null`)::
 Command to be executed instead of 'cargo' for runnables.
[[rust-analyzer.runnables.cargoExtraArgs]]rust-analyzer.runnables.cargoExtraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Additional arguments to be passed to cargo for runnables such as  tests or binaries.\nFor example, it may be `--release`.
[[rust-analyzer.rustcSource]]rust-analyzer.rustcSource (default: `null`)::
 Path to the rust compiler sources, for usage in rustc_private projects, or "discover"  to try to automatically find it.
[[rust-analyzer.rustfmt.extraArgs]]rust-analyzer.rustfmt.extraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Additional arguments to `rustfmt`.
[[rust-analyzer.rustfmt.overrideCommand]]rust-analyzer.rustfmt.overrideCommand (default: `null`)::
 Advanced option, fully override the command rust-analyzer uses for  formatting.

Commit message:

Document rustc_private in metadata

docs/user/generated_config.adoc, after:

[[rust-analyzer.assist.importMergeBehavior]]rust-analyzer.assist.importMergeBehavior (default: `"full"`)::
 The strategy to use when inserting new imports or merging imports.
[[rust-analyzer.assist.importPrefix]]rust-analyzer.assist.importPrefix (default: `"plain"`)::
 The path structure for newly inserted paths to use.
[[rust-analyzer.callInfo.full]]rust-analyzer.callInfo.full (default: `true`)::
 Show function name and docs in parameter hints.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.autoreload]]rust-analyzer.cargo.autoreload (default: `true`)::
 Automatically refresh project info via `cargo metadata` on  `Cargo.toml` changes.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures]]rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures (default: `false`)::
 Activate all available features (`--all-features`).
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.features]]rust-analyzer.cargo.features (default: `[]`)::
 List of features to activate.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts]]rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts (default: `false`)::
 Run build scripts (`build.rs`) for more precise code analysis.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.noDefaultFeatures]]rust-analyzer.cargo.noDefaultFeatures (default: `false`)::
 Do not activate the `default` feature.
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.target]]rust-analyzer.cargo.target (default: `null`)::
 Compilation target (target triple).
[[rust-analyzer.cargo.noSysroot]]rust-analyzer.cargo.noSysroot (default: `false`)::
 Internal config for debugging, disables loading of sysroot crates.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.enable]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.enable (default: `true`)::
 Run specified `cargo check` command for diagnostics on save.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allFeatures]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allFeatures (default: `null`)::
 Check with all features (`--all-features`).  Defaults to `#rust-analyzer.cargo.allFeatures#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allTargets]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.allTargets (default: `true`)::
 Check all targets and tests (`--all-targets`).
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.command]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.command (default: `"check"`)::
 Cargo command to use for `cargo check`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.noDefaultFeatures]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.noDefaultFeatures (default: `null`)::
 Do not activate the `default` feature.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.target]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.target (default: `null`)::
 Check for a specific target. Defaults to  `#rust-analyzer.cargo.target#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.extraArgs]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.extraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Extra arguments for `cargo check`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.features]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.features (default: `null`)::
 List of features to activate. Defaults to  `#rust-analyzer.cargo.features#`.
[[rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.overrideCommand]]rust-analyzer.checkOnSave.overrideCommand (default: `null`)::
 Advanced option, fully override the command rust-analyzer uses for  checking. The command should include `--message-format=json` or  similar option.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.addCallArgumentSnippets]]rust-analyzer.completion.addCallArgumentSnippets (default: `true`)::
 Whether to add argument snippets when completing functions.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.addCallParenthesis]]rust-analyzer.completion.addCallParenthesis (default: `true`)::
 Whether to add parenthesis when completing functions.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.postfix.enable]]rust-analyzer.completion.postfix.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show postfix snippets like `dbg`, `if`, `not`, etc.
[[rust-analyzer.completion.autoimport.enable]]rust-analyzer.completion.autoimport.enable (default: `true`)::
 Toggles the additional completions that automatically add imports when completed.  Note that your client must specify the `additionalTextEdits` LSP client capability to truly have this feature enabled.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enable]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show native rust-analyzer diagnostics.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enableExperimental]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.enableExperimental (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show experimental rust-analyzer diagnostics that might  have more false positives than usual.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.disabled]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.disabled (default: `[]`)::
 List of rust-analyzer diagnostics to disable.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsHint]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsHint (default: `[]`)::
 List of warnings that should be displayed with info severity.\n\nThe  warnings will be indicated by a blue squiggly underline in code and  a blue icon in the `Problems Panel`.
[[rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsInfo]]rust-analyzer.diagnostics.warningsAsInfo (default: `[]`)::
 List of warnings that should be displayed with hint severity.\n\nThe  warnings will be indicated by faded text or three dots in code and  will not show up in the `Problems Panel`.
[[rust-analyzer.files.watcher]]rust-analyzer.files.watcher (default: `"client"`)::
 Controls file watching implementation.
[[rust-analyzer.files.excludeDirs]]rust-analyzer.files.excludeDirs (default: `[]`)::
 These directories will be ignored by rust-analyzer.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.debug]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.debug (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Debug` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show HoverActions in Rust files.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.gotoTypeDef]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.gotoTypeDef (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Go to Type Definition` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.implementations]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.implementations (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Implementations` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.run]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.run (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Run` action. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.hoverActions.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.hoverActions.linksInHover]]rust-analyzer.hoverActions.linksInHover (default: `true`)::
 Use markdown syntax for links in hover.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.chainingHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.chainingHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show inlay type hints for method chains.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.maxLength]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.maxLength (default: `null`)::
 Maximum length for inlay hints. Default is unlimited.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.parameterHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.parameterHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show function parameter name inlay hints at the call  site.
[[rust-analyzer.inlayHints.typeHints]]rust-analyzer.inlayHints.typeHints (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show inlay type hints for variables.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.debug]]rust-analyzer.lens.debug (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Debug` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.enable]]rust-analyzer.lens.enable (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show CodeLens in Rust files.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.implementations]]rust-analyzer.lens.implementations (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Implementations` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.run]]rust-analyzer.lens.run (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `Run` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.methodReferences]]rust-analyzer.lens.methodReferences (default: `false`)::
 Whether to show `Method References` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.lens.references]]rust-analyzer.lens.references (default: `false`)::
 Whether to show `References` lens. Only applies when  `#rust-analyzer.lens.enable#` is set.
[[rust-analyzer.linkedProjects]]rust-analyzer.linkedProjects (default: `[]`)::
 Disable project auto-discovery in favor of explicitly specified set  of projects.\n\nElements must be paths pointing to `Cargo.toml`,  `rust-project.json`, or JSON objects in `rust-project.json` format.
[[rust-analyzer.lruCapacity]]rust-analyzer.lruCapacity (default: `null`)::
 Number of syntax trees rust-analyzer keeps in memory. Defaults to 128.
[[rust-analyzer.notifications.cargoTomlNotFound]]rust-analyzer.notifications.cargoTomlNotFound (default: `true`)::
 Whether to show `can't find Cargo.toml` error message.
[[rust-analyzer.procMacro.enable]]rust-analyzer.procMacro.enable (default: `false`)::
 Enable support for procedural macros, implies `#rust-analyzer.cargo.runBuildScripts#`.
[[rust-analyzer.procMacro.server]]rust-analyzer.procMacro.server (default: `null`)::
 Internal config, path to proc-macro server executable (typically,  this is rust-analyzer itself, but we override this in tests).
[[rust-analyzer.runnables.overrideCargo]]rust-analyzer.runnables.overrideCargo (default: `null`)::
 Command to be executed instead of 'cargo' for runnables.
[[rust-analyzer.runnables.cargoExtraArgs]]rust-analyzer.runnables.cargoExtraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Additional arguments to be passed to cargo for runnables such as  tests or binaries.\nFor example, it may be `--release`.
[[rust-analyzer.rustcSource]]rust-analyzer.rustcSource (default: `null`)::
 Path to the rust compiler sources, for usage in rustc_private projects, or "discover"  to try to automatically find it. Any project which uses rust-analyzer with the rustcPrivate  crates must set `[package.metadata.rust-analyzer] rustc_private=true` to use it.
[[rust-analyzer.rustfmt.extraArgs]]rust-analyzer.rustfmt.extraArgs (default: `[]`)::
 Additional arguments to `rustfmt`.
[[rust-analyzer.rustfmt.overrideCommand]]rust-analyzer.rustfmt.overrideCommand (default: `null`)::
 Advanced option, fully override the command rust-analyzer uses for  formatting.
