# Profile-guided Optimization

`rustc` supports doing profile-guided optimization (PGO). This chapter
describes what PGO is, what it is good for, and how it can be used.

## What Is Profile-Guided Optimization?

The basic concept of PGO is to collect data about the typical execution of a
program (e.g. which branches it is likely to take) and then use this data to
inform optimizations such as inlining, machine-code layout, register allocation,
etc. Optimization levels `-Copt-level=2` and above are recommended for use of
profile guided optimization.

`rustc` supports profile guided optimization with two different kinds of
profiling. A sampling profiler can generate a profile with very low runtime
overhead, or you can build an instrumented version of the code that collects
more detailed profile information. Both kinds of profiles can provide execution
counts for instructions in the code and information on branches taken and
function invocation.

There are different ways of collecting data about a program's execution. One is
to run the program inside a profiler (such as `perf`) and another is to create
an instrumented binary, that is, a binary that has data collection built into
it, and run that.

## Differences Between Instrumentation and Sampling

Although both techniques are used for similar purposes, there are important
differences between the two:

1. Profile data generated with one cannot be used by the other, and there is no
conversion tool that can convert one to the other. So, a profile generated via
`-Cprofile-generate` must be used with `-Cprofile-use`. Similarly, sampling
profiles generated by external profilers must be converted and used with
`-Cprofile-sample-use`.
2. Sampling profiles must be generated by an external tool.
The profile generated by that tool must then be converted into a format
that can be read by LLVM. The section on sampling profilers describes one of the
supported sampling profile formats.

## Profiling with Instrumentation

Generating a PGO-optimized program involves following a workflow with four
steps:

1. Compile the program with instrumentation enabled
   (e.g. `rustc -Cprofile-generate=/tmp/pgo-data -O main.rs`)
2. Run the instrumented program (e.g. `./main`) which generates a
   `default_<id>.profraw` file
3. Convert the `.profraw` file into a `.profdata` file using
   LLVM's `llvm-profdata` tool
4. Compile the program again, this time making use of the profiling data
   (for example `rustc -Cprofile-use=merged.profdata -O main.rs`)

An instrumented program will create one or more `.profraw` files, one for each
instrumented binary. E.g. an instrumented executable that loads two instrumented
dynamic libraries at runtime will generate three `.profraw` files. Running an
instrumented binary multiple times, on the other hand, will re-use the
respective `.profraw` files, updating them in place.

These `.profraw` files have to be post-processed before they can be fed back
into the compiler. This is done by the `llvm-profdata` tool. This tool is most
easily installed via

```bash
rustup component add llvm-tools-preview
```

Note that installing the `llvm-tools-preview` component won't add
`llvm-profdata` to the `PATH`. Rather, the tool can be found in:

```bash
~/.rustup/toolchains/<toolchain>/lib/rustlib/<target-triple>/bin/
```

Alternatively, an `llvm-profdata` coming with a recent LLVM or Clang version
usually works too.

The `llvm-profdata` tool merges multiple `.profraw` files into a single
`.profdata` file that can then be fed back into the compiler via
`-Cprofile-use`:

```bash
# STEP 1: Compile the binary with instrumentation
rustc -Cprofile-generate=/tmp/pgo-data -O main.rs

# STEP 2: Run the binary a few times, maybe with common sets of args.
# Each run will create or update `.profraw` files in /tmp/pgo-data
./main mydata1.csv
./main mydata2.csv
./main mydata3.csv

# STEP 3: Merge and post-process all the `.profraw` files in /tmp/pgo-data
llvm-profdata merge -o merged.profdata /tmp/pgo-data

# STEP 4: Use the merged `.profdata` file during optimization. All `rustc`
# flags have to be the same.
rustc -Cprofile-use=./merged.profdata -O main.rs
```

### A Complete Cargo Workflow

Using this feature with Cargo works very similar to using it with `rustc`
directly. Again, we generate an instrumented binary, run it to produce data,
merge the data, and feed it back into the compiler. Some things of note:

- We use the `RUSTFLAGS` environment variable in order to pass the PGO compiler
  flags to the compilation of all crates in the program.

- We pass the `--target` flag to Cargo, which prevents the `RUSTFLAGS`
  arguments to be passed to Cargo build scripts. We don't want the build scripts
  to generate a bunch of `.profraw` files.

- We pass `--release` to Cargo because that's where PGO makes the most sense.
  In theory, PGO can also be done on debug builds but there is little reason to
  do so.

- It is recommended to use *absolute paths* for the argument of
  `-Cprofile-generate` and `-Cprofile-use`. Cargo can invoke `rustc` with
  varying working directories, meaning that `rustc` will not be able to find the
  supplied `.profdata` file. With absolute paths this is not an issue.

- It is good practice to make sure that there is no left-over profiling data
  from previous compilation sessions. Just deleting the directory is a simple
  way of doing so (see `STEP 0` below).

This is what the entire workflow looks like:

```bash
# STEP 0: Make sure there is no left-over profiling data from previous runs
rm -rf /tmp/pgo-data

# STEP 1: Build the instrumented binaries
RUSTFLAGS="-Cprofile-generate=/tmp/pgo-data" \
    cargo build --release --target=x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu

# STEP 2: Run the instrumented binaries with some typical data
./target/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/release/myprogram mydata1.csv
./target/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/release/myprogram mydata2.csv
./target/x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu/release/myprogram mydata3.csv

# STEP 3: Merge the `.profraw` files into a `.profdata` file
llvm-profdata merge -o /tmp/pgo-data/merged.profdata /tmp/pgo-data

# STEP 4: Use the `.profdata` file for guiding optimizations
RUSTFLAGS="-Cprofile-use=/tmp/pgo-data/merged.profdata" \
    cargo build --release --target=x86_64-unknown-linux-gnu
```

### Troubleshooting

- It is recommended to pass `-Cllvm-args=-pgo-warn-missing-function` during the
  `-Cprofile-use` phase. LLVM by default does not warn if it cannot find
  profiling data for a given function. Enabling this warning will make it easier
  to spot errors in your setup.

- There is a [known issue](https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/7416) in
  Cargo prior to version 1.39 that will prevent PGO from working correctly. Be
  sure to use Cargo 1.39 or newer when doing PGO.

## Profiling with Sampling

Sampling profilers are used to collect runtime information, such as hardware
counters, while your application executes. They are typically very efficient and
do not incur a large runtime overhead. The sample data collected by the profiler
can be used during compilation to determine what the most executed areas of the
code are.

Using the data from a sample profiler requires some changes in the way a program
is built. Before the compiler can use profiling information, the code needs to
execute under the profiler. The following is the usual build cycle when using
sample profilers for optimization:

1. Build the code with source line table information. You can use all the usual
build flags that you always build your application with. The only requirement is
that DWARF debug info including source line information is generated. This DWARF
information is important for the profiler to be able to map instructions back to
source line locations. The accuracy of this DWARF information can be improved
with the `-Cdebuginfo-for-profiling` option. For example:

```bash
rustc -Cdebuginfo=line-tables-only -Cdebuginfo-for-profiling -O main.rs
```

2. Run the executable under a sampling profiler. The specific profiler you use
does not really matter, as long as its output can be converted into the format
that the LLVM optimizer understands.

Two such profilers are the Linux Perf [profiler](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/)
and Intel’s Sampling Enabling Product (SEP), available as part of Intel VTune.
While Perf is Linux-specific, SEP can be used on Linux, Windows, and FreeBSD.

The LLVM tool `llvm-profgen` can convert output of either Perf or SEP. An
external project, [AutoFDO](https://github.com/google/autofdo), also provides a
`create_llvm_prof` tool which supports Linux Perf output.

When using Perf:

```bash
perf record -b -e BR_INST_RETIRED.NEAR_TAKEN:uppp ./main
```

If the event above is unavailable, `branches:u` is probably next-best.

Note the use of the `-b` flag. This tells Perf to use the Last Branch Record
(LBR) to record call chains. While this is not strictly required, it provides
better call information, which improves the accuracy of the profile data.

When using SEP:

```bash
sep -start -out code.tb7 -ec BR_INST_RETIRED.NEAR_TAKEN:precise=yes:pdir \
    -lbr no_filter:usr -perf-script brstack -app ./main
```

This produces a `code.perf.data.script` output which can be used with
`llvm-profgen`’s `--perfscript` input option.

3. Convert the collected profile data to LLVM’s sample profile format. This is
currently supported via the AutoFDO converter `create_llvm_prof`. Once built and
installed, you can convert the `perf.data` file to LLVM using the command:

```bash
create_llvm_prof --binary=./main --out=main.prof
```

This will read `perf.data` and the binary file `./main` and emit the profile
data in `main.prof`. Note that if you ran `perf` without the `-b` flag, you need
to use `--use_lbr=false` when calling `create_llvm_prof`.

Alternatively, the LLVM tool `llvm-profgen` can also be used to generate the
LLVM sample profile:

```bash
llvm-profgen --binary=./main --output=main.prof --perfdata=perf.data
```

Please note, `perf.data` must be collected with `-b` flag to Linux perf for the
above step to work.

When using SEP the output is in the textual format corresponding to
`llvm-profgen --perfscript`. For example:

```bash
llvm-profgen --binary=./main --output=main.prof \
    --perfscript=main.perf.data.script
```

4. Build the code again using the collected profile. This step feeds the profile
back to the optimizers. This should result in a binary that executes faster than
the original one. Note that you are not required to build the code with the
exact same arguments that you used in the first step. The only requirement is
that you build the code with the same debug info options and
`-Cprofile-sample-use`.

```bash
rustc -Cprofile-sample-use=main.prof -Cdebuginfo-for-profiling -O main.rs
```

Note that Sample-based PGO in `rustc` is mostly tested on `x86-64` Linux
platforms. It should work on other hardware architectures and operating systems
but it's not heavily tested yet.

## Further Reading

`rustc`'s PGO support relies entirely on LLVM's implementation of the feature
and is equivalent to what Clang offers via the `-fprofile-generate` /
`-fprofile-use` and `-fprofile-sample-use` flags. The [Profile Guided
Optimization][clang-pgo] section in Clang's documentation is therefore an
interesting read for anyone who wants to use PGO with Rust.

[clang-pgo]:
https://clang.llvm.org/docs/UsersManual.html#profile-guided-optimization

## Community Maintained Tools

As an alternative to directly using the compiler for Profile-Guided
Optimization, you may choose to go with `cargo-pgo`, which has an intuitive
command-line API and saves you the trouble of doing all the manual work. You can
read more about it in [cargo-pgo repository][cargo-pgo]. For now, `cargo-pgo`
supports only Instrumentation PGO.

[cargo-pgo]: https://github.com/Kobzol/cargo-pgo

For the sake of completeness, here are the corresponding steps using
`cargo-pgo` for Instrumentation PGO:

```bash
# Install if you haven't already
cargo install cargo-pgo

cargo pgo build
cargo pgo optimize
```

These steps will do the following just as before:

1. Build an instrumented binary from the source code.
2. Run the instrumented binary to gather PGO profiles.
3. Use the gathered PGO profiles from the last step
   to build an optimized binary.
