library/compiler-builtins/libm/README.md, before:

# `libm`

A port of [MUSL]'s libm to Rust.

[MUSL]: https://musl.libc.org/

## Goals

The short term goal of this library is to [enable math support (e.g. `sin`, `atan2`) for the
`wasm32-unknown-unknown` target][wasm] (cf. [rust-lang/compiler-builtins][pr]). The longer
term goal is to enable [math support in the `core` crate][core].

[wasm]: https://github.com/rust-lang/libm/milestone/1
[pr]: https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-builtins/pull/248
[core]: https://github.com/rust-lang/libm/milestone/2

## Already usable

This crate is [on crates.io] and can be used today in stable `#![no_std]` programs.

The API documentation can be found [here](https://docs.rs/libm).

[on crates.io]: https://crates.io/crates/libm

## Benchmark
[benchmark]: #benchmark

The benchmarks are located in `crates/libm-bench` and require a nightly Rust toolchain.
To run all benchmarks:

> cargo +nightly bench --all

## Contributing

Please check [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## License

Licensed under either of

- Apache License, Version 2.0 ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0)
- MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

at your option.

### Contribution

Unless you explicitly state otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the
work by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be dual licensed as above, without any
additional terms or conditions.

Commit message:

Update licensing to MIT AND (MIT OR Apache-2.0)
Currently both Cargo.toml and the license files indicate that this
library may be used under either MIT or Apache-2.0. However, this is not
accurate; since portions of this library were derived from musl libc,
which is available under the MIT license, this terms of use for this
library must also include use under the MIT license. That is, it is not
correct that this library may be used under only the Apache-2.0 license.

Update the SPDX license identifier to `MIT OR (MIT AND Apache-2.0)` to
indicate that use must include the MIT license, but to clarify that
contributions are made under `MIT OR Apache-2.0`. This is compatible
with the current state of this repository since it has always contained
both license files, and the `Cargo.toml` license field has indicated
`MIT OR Apache-2.0` since it was added.

In accordance with the above, replace the two license files with a
combined LICENSE.txt that makes these terms clear and gives attribution
to works from which this library is derived.

Fixes: https://github.com/rust-lang/libm/issues/215
Link: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/channel/335408-foundation/topic/Request.20for.20legal.20team.20input.20on.20crate.20licensing
Link: https://git.musl-libc.org/cgit/musl/tree/COPYRIGHT

library/compiler-builtins/libm/README.md, after:

# `libm`

A port of [MUSL]'s libm to Rust.

[MUSL]: https://musl.libc.org/

## Goals

The short term goal of this library is to [enable math support (e.g. `sin`, `atan2`) for the
`wasm32-unknown-unknown` target][wasm] (cf. [rust-lang/compiler-builtins][pr]). The longer
term goal is to enable [math support in the `core` crate][core].

[wasm]: https://github.com/rust-lang/libm/milestone/1
[pr]: https://github.com/rust-lang/compiler-builtins/pull/248
[core]: https://github.com/rust-lang/libm/milestone/2

## Already usable

This crate is [on crates.io] and can be used today in stable `#![no_std]` programs.

The API documentation can be found [here](https://docs.rs/libm).

[on crates.io]: https://crates.io/crates/libm

## Benchmark
[benchmark]: #benchmark

The benchmarks are located in `crates/libm-bench` and require a nightly Rust toolchain.
To run all benchmarks:

> cargo +nightly bench --all

## Contributing

Please check [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md)

## License

Usage is licensed under the MIT license ([LICENSE-MIT](LICENSE-MIT) or
http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).


### Contribution

Contributions are licensed under both the MIT license and the Apache License,
Version 2.0 ([LICENSE-APACHE](LICENSE-APACHE) or
http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0). Unless you explicitly state
otherwise, any contribution intentionally submitted for inclusion in the work
by you, as defined in the Apache-2.0 license, shall be dual licensed as
mentioned, without any additional terms or conditions.

See `LICENSE.txt` for full details.
