The compiler could not infer a type and asked for a type annotation.

Erroneous code example:

```compile_fail,E0283
let x = "hello".chars().rev().collect();
```

This error indicates that type inference did not result in one unique possible
type, and extra information is required. In most cases this can be provided
by adding a type annotation. Sometimes you need to specify a generic type
parameter manually.

A common example is the `collect` method on `Iterator`. It has a generic type
parameter with a `FromIterator` bound, which for a `char` iterator is
implemented by `Vec` and `String` among others. Consider the following snippet
that reverses the characters of a string:

In the first code example, the compiler cannot infer what the type of `x` should
be: `Vec<char>` and `String` are both suitable candidates. To specify which type
to use, you can use a type annotation on `x`:

```
let x: Vec<char> = "hello".chars().rev().collect();
```

It is not necessary to annotate the full type. Once the ambiguity is resolved,
the compiler can infer the rest:

```
let x: Vec<_> = "hello".chars().rev().collect();
```

Another way to provide the compiler with enough information, is to specify the
generic type parameter:

```
let x = "hello".chars().rev().collect::<Vec<char>>();
```

Again, you need not specify the full type if the compiler can infer it:

```
let x = "hello".chars().rev().collect::<Vec<_>>();
```

We can see a self-contained example below:

```compile_fail,E0283
struct Foo;

impl Into<u32> for Foo {
    fn into(self) -> u32 { 1 }
}

let foo = Foo;
let bar: u32 = foo.into() * 1u32;
```

This error can be solved by adding type annotations that provide the missing
information to the compiler. In this case, the solution is to specify the
trait's type parameter:

```
struct Foo;

impl Into<u32> for Foo {
    fn into(self) -> u32 { 1 }
}

let foo = Foo;
let bar: u32 = Into::<u32>::into(foo) * 1u32;
```

## Annotating `into()` — turbofish does not work on trait methods

A common follow-up mistake when seeing E0283 on `into()` is to try to use
turbofish syntax to specify the type:

```rust,ignore
let x: u32 = y.into::<u32>(); // error[E0035]: does not take type parameters
```

This does **not** work. `Into` is a trait, and trait methods do not accept
turbofish syntax directly. The type must be inferred from the surrounding
context rather than specified at the call site.

The correct ways to annotate an `into()` call are:

**Option 1:** Annotate the binding with its expected type:

```
let y: i32 = 42;
let x: u32 = y.into(); // compiler infers `Into<u32>` from the annotation on `x`
```

**Option 2:** Use a type-ascription-style cast with `as` for primitive types:

```
let y: i32 = 42;
let x = y as u32;
```

**Option 3:** Use the fully-qualified syntax to name the trait explicitly:

```
let y: i32 = 42;
let x = Into::<u32>::into(y);
```

See also [E0035] for the error produced when turbofish is mistakenly used on a
trait method.

[E0035]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/error_codes/E0035.html
