- Start Date: 2014-03-17
- RFC PR #: [#132](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/132)
- Rust Issue #: [#16293](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/16293)

# Summary

This RFC describes a variety of extensions to allow any method to be
used as first-class functions. The same extensions also allow for
trait methods without receivers to be invoked in a more natural
fashion.

First, at present, the notation `path::method()` can be used to invoke
inherent methods on types. For example, `Vec::new()` is used to create
an instance of a vector. This RFC extends that notion to also cover
trait methods, so that something like `T::size_of()` or `T::default()`
is legal.

Second, currently it is permitted to reference so-called "static
methods" from traits using a function-like syntax. For example, one
can write `Default::default()`. This RFC extends that notation so it
can be used with any methods, whether or not they are defined with a
receiver. (In fact, the distinction between static methods and other
methods is completely erased, as per the method lookup of RFC PR #48.)

Third, we introduce an unambiguous if verbose notation that permits
one to precisely specify a trait method and its receiver type in one
form. Specifically, the notation `<T as TraitRef>::item` can be used
to designate an item `item`, defined in a trait `TraitRef`, as
implemented by the type `T`.

# Motivation

There are several motivations:

- There is a need for an unambiguous way to invoke methods. This is typically
  a fallback for when the more convenient invocation forms fail:
  - For example, when multiple traits are in scope that all define the same
    method for the same types, there must be a way to disambiguate which
    method you mean.
  - It is sometimes desirable not to have autoderef:
    - For methods like `clone()` that apply to almost all types, it is
      convenient to be more specific about which precise type you want
      to clone. To get this right with autoderef, one must know the
      precise rules being used, which is contrary to the "DWIM"
      intention.
    - For types that implement `Deref<T>`, UFCS can be used to
      unambiguously differentiate between methods invoked on the smart
      pointer itself and methods invoked on its referent.
- There are many methods, such as `SizeOf::size_of()`, that return properties
  of the type alone and do not naturally take any argument that can be used
  to decide which trait impl you are referring to.
  - This proposal introduces a variety of ways to invoke such methods,
    varying in the amount of explicit information one includes:
    - `T::size_of()` -- shorthand, but only works if `T` is a path
    - `<T>::size_of()` -- infers the trait `SizeOf` based on the traits in scope,
      just as with a method call
    - `<T as SizeOf>::size_of()` -- completely unambiguous

# Detailed design

### Path syntax

The syntax of paths is extended as follows:

    PATH = ID_SEGMENT { '::' ID_SEGMENT }
         | TYPE_SEGMENT { '::' ID_SEGMENT }
         | ASSOC_SEGMENT '::' ID_SEGMENT { '::' ID_SEGMENT }
    ID_SEGMENT   = ID [ '::' '<' { TYPE ',' TYPE } '>' ]
    TYPE_SEGMENT = '<' TYPE '>'
    ASSOC_SEGMENT = '<' TYPE 'as' TRAIT_REFERENCE '>'

Examples of valid paths. In these examples, capitalized names refer to
types (though this doesn't affect the grammar).

    a::b::c
    a::<T1,T2>::b::c
    T::size_of
    <T>::size_of
    <T as SizeOf>::size_of
    Eq::eq
    Eq::<T>::eq
    Zero::zero

### Normalization of path that reference types

Whenever a path like `...::a::...` resolves to a type (but not a
*trait*), it is rewritten (internally) to `<...::a>::...`.

Note that there is a subtle distinction between the following paths:

    ToStr::to_str
    <ToStr>::to_str

In the former, we are selecting the member `to_str` from the trait `ToStr`.
The result is a function whose type is basically equivalent to:

    fn to_str<Self:ToStr>(self: &Self) -> String

In the latter, we are selecting the member `to_str` from the *type*
`ToStr` (i.e., an `ToStr` object). Resolving type members is
different. In this case, it would yield a function roughly equivalent
to:

    fn to_str(self: &ToStr) -> String

This subtle distinction arises from the fact that we pun on the trait
name to indicate both a type and a reference to the trait itself. In
this case, depending on which interpretation we choose, the path
resolution rules differ slightly.

### Paths that begin with a TYPE_SEGMENT

When a path begins with a TYPE_SEGMENT, it is a type-relative path. If
this is the complete path (e.g., `<int>`), then the path resolves to
the specified type. If the path continues (e.g., `<int>::size_of`)
then the next segment is resolved using the following procedure.  The
procedure is intended to mimic method lookup, and hence any changes to
method lookup may also change the details of this lookup.

Given a path `<T>::m::...`:

1. Search for members of inherent impls defined on `T` (if any) with
   the name `m`. If any are found, the path resolves to that item.
2. Otherwise, let `IN_SCOPE_TRAITS` be the set of traits that are in
   scope and which contain a member named `m`:
   - Let `IMPLEMENTED_TRAITS` be those traits from `IN_SCOPE_TRAITS`
     for which an implementation exists that (may) apply to `T`.
     - There can be ambiguity in the case that `T` contains type inference
       variables.
   - If `IMPLEMENTED_TRAITS` is not a singleton set, report an ambiguity
     error. Otherwise, let `TRAIT` be the member of `IMPLEMENTED_TRAITS`.
   - If `TRAIT` is ambiguously implemented for `T`, report an
     ambiguity error and request further type information.
   - Otherwise, rewrite the path to `<T as Trait>::m::...` and
     continue.

### Paths that begin with an ASSOC_SEGMENT

When a path begins with an ASSOC_SEGMENT, it is a reference to an
associated item defined from a trait. Note that such paths must always
have a follow-on member `m` (that is, `<T as Trait>` is not a complete
path, but `<T as Trait>::m` is).

To resolve the path, first search for an applicable implementation of
`Trait` for `T`. If no implementation can be found -- or the result is
ambiguous -- then report an error.

Otherwise:

- Determine the types of output type parameters for `Trait` from the
  implementation.
- If output type parameters were specified in the path, ensure that they
  are compatible with those specified on the impl.
  - For example, if the path were `<int as SomeTrait<uint>>`, and
    the impl is declared as `impl SomeTrait<char> for int`, then an error
    would be reported because `char` and `uint` are not compatible.
- Resolve the path to the member of the trait with the substitution composed
  of the output type parameters from the impl and `Self => T`.

# Alternatives

We have explored a number of syntactic alternatives. This has been selected
as being the only one that is simultaneously:

- Tolerable to look at.
- Able to convey *all* necessary information along with auxiliary information
  the user may want to verify:
  - Self type, type of trait, name of member, type output parameters

Here are some leading candidates that were considered along with their
equivalents in the syntax proposed by this RFC. The reasons for their
rejection are listed:

    module::type::(Trait::member)    <module::type as Trait>::member
    --> semantics of parentheses considered too subtle
    --> cannot accomodate types that are not paths, like `[int]`

    (type: Trait)::member            <type as Trait>::member
    --> complicated to parse
    --> cannot accomodate types that are not paths, like `[int]`

    ... (I can't remember all the rest)

One variation that is definitely possible is that we could use the `:`
rather than the keyword `as`:

    <type: Trait>::member            <type as Trait>::member
    --> no real objection. `as` was chosen because it mimics the
        syntax for constructing a trait object.

# Unresolved questions

Is there a better way to disambiguate a reference to a trait item
`ToStr::to_str` versus a reference to a member of the object type
`<ToStr>::to_str`? I personally do not think so: so long as we pun on
the name of the trait, the potential for confusion will
remain. Therefore, the only two possibilities I could come up with are
to try and change the question:

- One answer might be that we simply make the second form meaningless
  by prohibiting inherent impls on object types. But there remains a
  utility to being able to write something like `<ToStr>::is_sized()`
  (where `is_sized()` is an example of a trait fn that could apply to
  both sized and unsized types). Moreover, artificially restricting
  object types just for this reason doesn't seem right.

- Another answer is to change the syntax of object types. I have
  sometimes considered that `impl ToStr` might be better suited as the
  object type and then `ToStr` could be used as syntactic sugar for a
  type parameter.  But there exists a lot of precedent for the current
  approach and hence I think this is likely a bad idea (not to mention
  that it'a a drastic change).
