- Feature Name: n/a
- Start Date: 2015-10-13
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

This RFC describes how we intend to modify the compiler to support IDEs. The
intention is that support will be as generic as possible. A follow-up internals
post will describe how we intend to focus our energies and deploy Rust support
in actual IDEs.

There are two sets of technical changes proposed in this RFC: changes to how we
compile, and the creation of an 'oracle' tool (name of tool TBC).

This RFC is fairly detailed, it is intended as a straw-man plan to guide early
implementation, rather than as a strict blueprint.


## Compilation model

An IDE will perform two kinds of compilation - an incremental check as the user
types (used to provide error and code completion information) and a full build.
The full build is explicitly signaled by the user (it could also happen
implicitly, for example when the user saves a file). A full build is basically
just a `cargo build` command, as would be done from the command line. It will
take advantage of any future improvements to regular compilation (such as
incremental compilation), but there is essentially no change from a compile
today. It is not very interesting and won't be discussed further.

The incremental check follows a new model of compilation. This check must be as
fast as possible but does not need to generate machine code. We'll describe it
in more detail below. We call this kind of compilation a 'quick-check'.

This RFC also covers making compilation more robust.


## The oracle

The oracle is a long running daemon process. It will keep a database
representation of an entire project's source code and semantic information (as
opposed to the compiler which operates on a crate at a time). It is
incrementally updated by the compiler and provides an IPC API for providing
information about a program - the low-level information an IDE (or similar tool)
needs, e.g., code completion options, location of definitions/declarations,
documentation for items.

The oracle is a general purpose, low-level tool and should be usable by any IDE
as well as other tools. End users and editors with less project knowledge should
use the oracle via a more friendly interface (such as Racer).


## Other shared functionality

Other functionality, such as refactoring and reformatting will be provided by
separate tools rather than the oracle. These should be sharable between IDE
implementations. They are not covered in this RFC.


# Motivation

An IDE collects together many tools into a single piece of software. Some of
these are entirely separate from the rest of the Rust eco-system (such as editor
functionality), some will reuse existing tools in pretty much the same way they
are already used (e.g., formatting code, which should straightforwardly use
Rustfmt), and some will have totally new ways of using the compiler or other
tools (e.g., code completion).

Modern IDEs are large and complex pieces of software; creating a new one from
scratch for Rust would be impractical. Therefore we need to work with existing
IDEs (such as Eclipse, IntelliJ, and Visual Studio) to provide functionality.
These IDEs provide excellent editor and project management support out of the
box, but know nothing about the Rust language.

An important aspect of IDE support is that response times must be extremely
short. Users expect information as they type. Running normal compilation of an
entire project is far too slow. Furthermore, as the user is typing, the program
will not be a valid, complete Rust program.

We expect that an IDE may have its own lexer and parser. This is necessary for
the IDE to quickly give parse errors as the user types. Editors are free to rely
on the compiler's parsing if they prefer (the compiler will do its own parsing
in any case). Further information (name resolution, type information, etc.) will
be provided by the compiler via the oracle.


# Detailed design

## Quick-check compilation

(See also open questions, below).

We run the quick-check compiler on a single crate. At some point after quick
checking, dependent crates must be rebuilt. This is the responsibility of an
external tool to manage (see below). Quick-check is driven by an IDE (or
possibly by the oracle), not by Cargo.


### Incremental and lazy compilation

Incremental compilation is where, rather than re-compiling an entire crate, only
code which is changed and its dependencies are re-compiled. See
[RFC #1298](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1298).

Lazy compilation is where, rather than compiling an entire crate, we start by
compiling a single function (or possibly some other unit of code), and re-
compiling code which is depended on until we are done. Not all of a crate will
be compiled in this fashion.

These two compilation strategies are faster than the current compilation model
(compile everything, every time). They are somewhat orthogonal - compilation can
be either lazy or incremental without implying the other. The [current
proposal](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1298) for supporting
incremental compilation involves some lazy compilation as an implementation
detail.

For quick-checking, compilation should be both incremental and lazy. The input
to the compiler is not just the crate being re-compiled, but also the span of
code changed (normal incremental compilation computes this span for itself, but
the IDE already has this information, so it would be wasteful to recompute it).
As a further optimisation, if the IDE can refer to items by an id (such as a
path), then this could be fed to the compiler rather than a code span to save
the compiler the effort of finding an AST node from a code span.

We begin by computing which code is invalidated by the change (that is, any code
which depends on the changed code). We then re-compile the changed code.
Information which is depended upon is looked up in the saved metadata used for
incremental compilation. When we have re-compiled the changed code, then we
output the result (see below). If there are no fatal errors, then we continue to
compile the rest of the invalidated code.


### Compilation output

The output of compilation is either success or a set of errors (as with today's
compiler, but see below for more detail on error message format). However, since
compilation can continue after returning an initial result, we might produce
further errors (I presume that IDEs provide a mechanism for the compiler to
communicate these asynchronously to the IDE plugin).

In addition we must produce data to update the oracle, this should be done
directly, without involving the IDE plugin.

Quick-check does not generate executable code or crate metadata. However, it
should (probably) update the metadata used for incremental compilation.


### Multiple crates

Quick check only applies to a single crate, however, after some changes we might
need to re-compile dependent crates. This is the IDE's responsibility. In the
short term we can just trigger a full re-build (via Cargo) when the user starts
editing a file belonging to a different crate (there will obviously be some lag
there). The compiler must also generate crate metadata for the modified crate.

Long term, the IDE might keep track of the dependency graph between crates
(provided by Cargo). The quick-check should signal when a crate's public
interface changes due to re-compilation. In that case the IDE can trigger
background re-compilation of dependent crates (possibly with some
delay/batching).


## The Oracle

The oracle is a long-running tool which takes input from both full builds and
quick-checks, and responds to queries about a Rust program. Of particular note
is that it knows about a whole project, not just a single crate. In fact, other
than as a kind of module, it doesn't much care about the notion of a crate at
all.

We require a data format for getting metadata from the compiler to the oracle.
Unfortunately none of the existing ones are quite right. Crate metadata is not
complete enough (it mostly only contains data about interfaces, not function
bodies), save-analysis data has been processed too far (basically into strings)
which loses some of the structure that would be useful, debuginfo is not Rust-
centric enough (i.e., does not contain Rust type information) and is based on
expanded source code. Furthermore, serialising any of the compiler's IRs is not
good enough: the AST and HIR do not contain any type or name information, the
HIR and MIR are post-expansion.

The best option seems to be the save-analysis information. This is in a poor
format, but is the 'right' data (it can be based on an early AST and includes
type and name information). It can be evolved to be more efficient form over the
long run (it has been a low priority task for a while to support different
formats for the information).

Full builds will generate a dump of save-analysis data for a whole crate. Quick
checks will generate data for the changed code. In both cases the oracle must
incrementally update its knowledge of the source code. How exactly to do this
when neither names nor ids are stable is an interesting question, but too much
detail for this RFC (especially as the implementation of ids in the compiler is
evolving).

For crates which are not built from source (for example the standard library),
authors can choose to distribute the oracle's metadata to allow users to get a
good IDE experience with these crates. In this case, we only need metadata for
interfaces, not the bodies of functions or private items. The oracle should
handle such reduced metadata. It should be possible to generate the oracle's
metadata from the crate metadata, but this is not a short-term goal. (Note this
will require some knowledge in the IDE too - if there is no corresponding source
code, the IDE cannot 'jump to definition', for example).

The oracle's data is platform-dependent. We must be careful when working with a
cross-compiled project to generate metadata for the target machine. This
shouldn't be a problem for normal compilation, but it means that quick-check
compilation must be configured for the same target, and care should be taken
with downloaded metadata.

As well as metadata based on types and names, the oracle should keep track of
warnings. Since code with warnings but no errors is not re-compiled, a tool
outside the compiler must track them for display in the IDE. This will be done
by the oracle.


### Details

#### API

The oracle's API is a set of IPC calls. How exactly these should be implemented
is not clear. The most promising options are sending JSON over TCP, using
[thrift](https://thrift.apache.org/), or using Cap'n Proto (I'm unclear about
exactly what the transport layer looks like using Cap'n Proto, there is no Cap'n
Proto RCP implementation for Java, but I believe there is an alternative using
shared, memory mapped files as a buffer; I'm not familiar enough with the
library to work out what is needed).

I've detailed the API I believe we'll need to start with. This is slightly more
than a minimal set. I expect it will expand as time goes by. At some point we
will want to stabilise parts of the API to allow for third party implementations
of the oracle and compiler.

All API calls can return success or error results. Many calls involve a *span*;
for the oracle's API, this is defined as two byte offsets from the start of the
file (oracle spans must always be contained in a single file).

There are some alternative span definitions: we could use file and column indices
rather than byte offsets (this has some edge case difficulties with the
definition of a newline - do unicode newlines count? It also requires some extra
computation), we could use character offsets (again involves some more
computation, but might be more robust).

A problem is that Visual Studio uses UTF16 while Rust uses UTF8, there is (I
understand) no efficient way to convert between byte counts in these systems.
I'm not sure how to address this. It might require the oracle to be able to
operate in UTF16 mode.

Where no return value is specified, the call returns success or failure (with a
reason).

The philosophy of the API is that most functions should only take a single call,
as opposed to making each function as minimal and orthogonal as possible. This
is because IPC can be slow and response time is important for IDEs.


**Projects**

Note that the oracle stores no metadata about a project.

*init project*

Takes a project name, returns an id string (something close to the project's name).

*delete project*

Takes a project id.

*list projects*

Takes nothing, returns a list of project ids.

Each of the remaining calls takes a project identifier.


**Update**

See section on input data format below.

*update*

Takes input data (actual source code rather than spans since we cannot assume
the user has saved the file) and a list of spans to invalidate.  Where there are
no invalidated spans, the update call adds data (which will cause an error if
there are conflicts). Where there is no input data, update just invalidates.

We might want to allow some shortcuts to invalidate an entire file or
recursively invalidate a directory.


**Description**

*get definition*

Takes a span, returns all 'definitions and declarations' for the identifier
covered by the span. Can return an error if the span does not cover exactly one
identifier or the oracle has no data for an identifier.

The returned data is a list of 'definition' data. That data includes the span
for the item, any documentation for the item, a code snippet for the item,
optionally a type for the item, and one or more kinds of definition (e.g.,
'variable definition', 'field definition', 'function declaration').

*get references*

Takes a span, returns a list of reference data (or an error). Each datum
consists of the span of the reference and a code snippet.

*get docs*

Takes a span, returns the same data as *get definition* but limited to doc strings.

*get type*

Takes a span, returns the same data as *get definition* but limited to type information.

Question: are these useful/necessary? Or should users just call *get definition*?

*search for identifier*

Takes a search string or an id, and a struct of search parameters including case
sensitivity, the scope of the search, and the kind of items to search (e.g.,
functions, traits, all items). Returns a list of spans and code snippets.


**Code completion**

*get suggestions*

Takes a span (note that this span could be empty, e.g, for `foo.` we would use
the empty span which starts after the `.`; for `foo.b` we would use the span for
`b`), and returns a list of suggestions (is this useful? Is there any difference
from just using the caret position?). Each suggestion consists of the text for
completion plus the same information as returned for the *get definition* call.


#### Input data format

The precise serialisation format of the oracle's input data will likely change
over time. At first, I propose we use csv, since that is what save-analysis
currently supports, and there is good decoding support for Rust. Longer term we
should use a binary format for more efficient serialisation and deserialisation.

Each datum consists of an identifier, a kind, a span, and a set of fields (the
exact fields are dependent on the kind of data).

If the datum is for a definition (of a trait, struct, etc.), then the identifier
is an absolute path (including the crate) to that definition. Question: how to
identify impls - do we need to distinguish multiple impls for the same trait and
data type?

For statements and expressions, the identifier is a path to the expression's
function (or static/const) and a function relative id. Note that this means we
have to invalidate an entire function at a time (or at least all of the function
after the edited portion). It would be nice if we could avoid this and be more
fine-grained about invalidation, any ideas?

I propose that we follow the save-analysis data format to start with (in terms
of the kinds of data available and the fields for each). However, we should use
identifiers rather than DefIds and distinguish fields from variables.


### Racer

The oracle fulfills a similar role to
[Racer](https://github.com/phildawes/racer). Indeed, forking Racer may be a good
way to start development of the oracle. The oracle should provide more
information and should be more accurate by being more closely integrated with
the compiler.

Racer could be refactored to be a client of the oracle, thus taking advantage of
more accurate data and a simpler implementation, whilst maintaining its
interface. This would be a nice way to make the oracle's data available to less
sophisticated editors. Alternatively, Racer could make use of the oracle's
metadata but do its own processing of that data to provide an alternate
implementation of an oracle.


### DXR and Rustdoc

Both DXR and Rustdoc could be rewritten to talk to the oracle and run in a live
mode, rather than maintaining their own pre-processed data. This would have some
benefit in keeping these resources up to date as programs are edited (and
reducing the number of ways for doing essentially the same thing). However, this
does not seem like enough motivation to actually do the work. Could be an
interesting student project or something.


## Robust compilation

The goal here is that when the user is typing, we should be able to run the
early stages of the quick-check compiler and still come up with sensible code
completion suggestions. The IDE and compiler can collaborate to some extent
here.

As long as we can compile as far as type checking, then the compiler should
still generate metadata for the oracle. If we fail later (e.g., in borrow
checking) then we should return errors *and* metadata for the oracle. If we fail
to type check, then we cannot generate meaningful data for the oracle (or if we
succeed at type checking, but use some error recovery).

THE IDE should instruct the oracle to invalidate some of its data. I believe that
this does not require deep knowledge about the program (i.e., we know a span has
changed and compilation has failed, we can instruct the oracle to invalidate all
data associated with that span. With luck, we can leverage the dependency
information the compiler has for incremental compilation here).

In some cases a program would fail to parse or pass name resolution, but we
would like to try to type check. For example,

```rust
fn main() {
    let x = foo.bar.
```

will not parse, but we would like to suggest code completion options.

```rust
fn main() {
    let foo = foo();
    let x = fo; 
}
```

will parse, but fail name resolution, but again we would like to suggest code
completion options.

There are two issues: dealing with incomplete or incorrect names (e.g., `fo` in
the second example), and dealing with unfinished AST nodes (e.g., in the first
example we need an identifier to finish the `.` expression, a `;` to terminate
the let statement, and a `}` to terminate the `main` function).

A solution to the first problem is replacing invalid names with some magic
identifier, and ignoring errors involving that identifier. @sanxiyn implemented
something like the second feature in a
[PR](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/21323). His approach was to take a
command line argument for where to 'complete at' and to treat that as the magic
identifier. An alternate approach would be to use a keyword or distinguished
identifier which the IDE could insert (based on the caret position), or to
fallback to the magic identifier whenever there is a name resolution error.

Similarly during type checking, if we find a mismatched or unknown type, we
should try to continue type checking with the information available so as to
still be able to provide code completion information. We already do this to some
extent with `TyErr`, but we should do better.

For the second issue, the problem is where to start parsing again and how many
'open' items should be terminated. This is closely related to error recovery in
parsers, which is a well-developed are of research with a long history, and
which I won't attempt to summarise here. As far as I can see, there are two
major differences since we are doing this in the IDE context: we know the extent
of edited code (the span of changes we are passing to the quick-check compiler)
and the previous state of the edited code, and we can likely assume that even in
new code, braces and parentheses are likely to be paired (since an IDE will
insert closing braces, etc.). Assuming that we keep the state of the code the
last time it parsed completely, we can expand the edited span to cover an entire
expression (or other item) and thus we know exactly where to start re-parsing.
In the case where we are writing new code, we can just close all 'open' items.

Being able to generate more errors before stopping would be an advantage for the
compiler in any case. However, we probably do not want to use these mechanisms
under normal compilation, only when performing a quick-check from the IDE.



## Error format

Currently the compiler generates text error messages. I propose that we add a
mechanism to the compiler to support different formats for error messages. We
already structure our error messages to some extent (separating the span
information, the message, and the error code). Rather than turning these
components into text in a fairly ad hoc manner, we should preserve that
structure, and some central error handler should convert into a chosen format.
We should support the current text format, JSON (or some other structured
format) for tools to use, and HTML for rich error messages (this is somewhat
orthogonal to this RFC, but has been discussed in the past as a desirable
feature).


# Drawbacks

It's a lot of work. On the other hand the largest changes are desirable for
general improvements in compilation speed or for other tools.


# Alternatives

The oracle and quick-check compiler could be combined in a single tool. This
might be more efficient, but would increase complexity and decrease opportunity
for third party alternatives.

The oracle could do more - actually perform some of the processing tasks usually
done by IDEs (such as editing source code) or other tools (refactoring,
reformating, etc.).

Should the oracle hide the quick-check compiler? I.e., the IDE talks only to the
oracle and the oracle requests compilation as needed. This might make things a
bit simpler for the IDE and means less IPC overhead and complexity. Either the
oracle could be responsible for all coordination, or the IDE could remain
responsible for coordinating when crates are handled, and the oracle is
responsible for coordinating calls to the quick check compiler to build a single
crate.


# Unresolved questions

Should the quick-check compilation be provided by a separate tool or a mode of
the compiler? It is fairly different in its operation from the compiler. It
might be better to provide a different 'frontend' rather than adding many more
options to the compiler. (I think the answer is 'yes').

Should quick-check be a long running process? It could save some time by not
having to reload metadata, but having to keep metadata for an entire project in
memory would be expensive. We could perhaps compromise by unloading when the
user needs to recompile a different crate. I believe it is probably better in
the long run, but a batch process is OK to start with.

How and when should we generate crate metadata. It seems sensible to generate
this when we switch to editing/re-compiling a different crate. However, it's not
clear if this must be done from scratch or if it can be produced from the
incremental compilation metadata (see that RFC, I guess).

What should we call the oracle tool? I don't particularly like "oracle",
although it is descriptive (it comes from the Go tool of the same name).
Alternatives are 'Rider', 'Racer Server', or anything you can think of.

How do we handle different versions of Rust and interact with multi-rust?
Upgrades to the next stable version of Rust?

Do we need to standardise error messages for the various parsers to prevent user
confusion (i.e., try to ensure that rustc and the various IDEs give the same
error messages).
