text/0000-slice-tail-redesign.md, before:

- Feature Name: `slice_tail_redesign`
- Start Date: 2015-04-11
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

Replace `slice.tail()`, `slice.init()` with new methods `slice.shift_first()`,
`slice.shift_last()`.

# Motivation

The `slice.tail()` and `slice.init()` methods are relics from an older version
of the slice APIs that included a `head()` method. `slice` no longer has
`head()`, instead it has `first()` which returns an `Option`, and `last()` also
returns an `Option`. While it's generally accepted that indexing / slicing
should panic on out-of-bounds access, `tail()`/`init()` are the only
remaining methods that panic without taking an explicit index.

A conservative change here would be to simply change `head()`/`tail()` to return
`Option`, but I believe we can do better. These operations are actually
specializations of `split_at()` and should be replaced with methods that return
`Option<(T,&[T])>`. This makes the common operation of processing the first/last
element and the remainder of the list more ergonomic, with very low impact on
code that only wants the remainder (such code only has to add `.1` to the
expression). This has an even more significant effect on code that uses the
mutable variants.

# Detailed design

The methods `head()`, `tail()`, `head_mut()`, and `tail_mut()` will be removed,
and new methods will be added:

```rust
fn shift_first(&self) -> Option<(&T, &[T])>;
fn shift_last(&self) -> Option<(&T, &[T])>;
fn shift_first_mut(&mut self) -> Option<(&mut T, &mut [T])>;
fn shift_last_mut(&mut self) -> Option<(&mut T, &mut [T])>;
```

Existing code using `tail()` or `init()` could be translated as follows:

* `slice.tail()` becomes `slice.shift_first().unwrap().1` or `&slice[1..]`
* `slice.init()` becomes `slice.shift_last().unwrap().1` or
  `&slice[..slice.len()-1]`

It is expected that a lot of code using `tail()` or `init()` is already either
testing `len()` explicitly or using `first()` / `last()` and could be refactored
to use `shift_first()` / `shift_last()` in a more ergonomic fashion. As an
example, the following code from typeck:

```rust
if variant.fields.len() > 0 {
    for field in variant.fields.init() {
```

can be rewritten as:

```rust
if let Some((_, init_fields)) = variant.fields.shift_last() {
    for field in init_fields {
```

And the following code from compiletest:

```rust
let argv0 = args[0].clone();
let args_ = args.tail();
```

can be rewritten as:

```rust
let (argv0, args_) = args.shift_first().unwrap();
```

(the `clone()` ended up being unnecessary).

# Drawbacks

The expression `slice.shift_last().unwrap.1` is more cumbersome than
`slice.init()`. However, this is primarily due to the need for `.unwrap()`
rather than the need for `.1`, and would affect the more conservative solution
(of making the return type `Option<&[T]>`) as well.

# Alternatives

Only change the return type to `Option` without adding the tuple. This is the
more conservative change mentioned above. It still has the same drawback of
requiring `.unwrap()` when translating existing code. And it's unclear what the
function names should be (the current names are considered suboptimal).

# Unresolved questions

Is the name correct? There's precedent in this name in the form of
[`str::slice_shift_char()`][slice_shift_char]. An alternative name might be
`pop_first()`/`pop_last()`, or `shift_front()`/`shift_back()` (although the
usage of `first`/`last` was chosen to match the existing methods `first()` and
`last()`).

[slice_shift_char]: http://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/primitive.str.html#method.slice_shift_char

Commit message:

Add split_first/split_last to unresolved questions
Add the suggested `split_` prefix as a name option, albeit with the
names `split_first()`/`split_last()` instead of the originally-suggested
`split_init()`/`split_tail()`.

Add a question about the return type of `shift_last()`.

text/0000-slice-tail-redesign.md, after:

- Feature Name: `slice_tail_redesign`
- Start Date: 2015-04-11
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- Rust Issue: (leave this empty)

# Summary

Replace `slice.tail()`, `slice.init()` with new methods `slice.shift_first()`,
`slice.shift_last()`.

# Motivation

The `slice.tail()` and `slice.init()` methods are relics from an older version
of the slice APIs that included a `head()` method. `slice` no longer has
`head()`, instead it has `first()` which returns an `Option`, and `last()` also
returns an `Option`. While it's generally accepted that indexing / slicing
should panic on out-of-bounds access, `tail()`/`init()` are the only
remaining methods that panic without taking an explicit index.

A conservative change here would be to simply change `head()`/`tail()` to return
`Option`, but I believe we can do better. These operations are actually
specializations of `split_at()` and should be replaced with methods that return
`Option<(T,&[T])>`. This makes the common operation of processing the first/last
element and the remainder of the list more ergonomic, with very low impact on
code that only wants the remainder (such code only has to add `.1` to the
expression). This has an even more significant effect on code that uses the
mutable variants.

# Detailed design

The methods `head()`, `tail()`, `head_mut()`, and `tail_mut()` will be removed,
and new methods will be added:

```rust
fn shift_first(&self) -> Option<(&T, &[T])>;
fn shift_last(&self) -> Option<(&T, &[T])>;
fn shift_first_mut(&mut self) -> Option<(&mut T, &mut [T])>;
fn shift_last_mut(&mut self) -> Option<(&mut T, &mut [T])>;
```

Existing code using `tail()` or `init()` could be translated as follows:

* `slice.tail()` becomes `slice.shift_first().unwrap().1` or `&slice[1..]`
* `slice.init()` becomes `slice.shift_last().unwrap().1` or
  `&slice[..slice.len()-1]`

It is expected that a lot of code using `tail()` or `init()` is already either
testing `len()` explicitly or using `first()` / `last()` and could be refactored
to use `shift_first()` / `shift_last()` in a more ergonomic fashion. As an
example, the following code from typeck:

```rust
if variant.fields.len() > 0 {
    for field in variant.fields.init() {
```

can be rewritten as:

```rust
if let Some((_, init_fields)) = variant.fields.shift_last() {
    for field in init_fields {
```

And the following code from compiletest:

```rust
let argv0 = args[0].clone();
let args_ = args.tail();
```

can be rewritten as:

```rust
let (argv0, args_) = args.shift_first().unwrap();
```

(the `clone()` ended up being unnecessary).

# Drawbacks

The expression `slice.shift_last().unwrap.1` is more cumbersome than
`slice.init()`. However, this is primarily due to the need for `.unwrap()`
rather than the need for `.1`, and would affect the more conservative solution
(of making the return type `Option<&[T]>`) as well.

# Alternatives

Only change the return type to `Option` without adding the tuple. This is the
more conservative change mentioned above. It still has the same drawback of
requiring `.unwrap()` when translating existing code. And it's unclear what the
function names should be (the current names are considered suboptimal).

# Unresolved questions

Is the name correct? There's precedent in this name in the form of
[`str::slice_shift_char()`][slice_shift_char]. An alternative name might be
`pop_first()`/`pop_last()`, or `shift_front()`/`shift_back()` (although the
usage of `first`/`last` was chosen to match the existing methods `first()` and
`last()`). Another option is `split_first()`/`split_last()`.

Should `shift_last()` return `Option<(&T, &[T])>` or `Option<(&[T], &T)>`?
I believe that the former is correct with this name, but the latter might be
more suitable given the name `split_last()`.

[slice_shift_char]: http://doc.rust-lang.org/nightly/std/primitive.str.html#method.slice_shift_char
