- Feature Name: int128
- Start Date: 21-02-2016
- RFC PR: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/1504
- Rust Issue: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/35118

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

This RFC adds the `i128` and `u128` primitive types to Rust.

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

Some algorithms need to work with very large numbers that don't fit in 64 bits, such as certain cryptographic algorithms. One possibility would be to use a BigNum library, but these use heap allocation and tend to have high overhead. LLVM has support for very efficient 128-bit integers, which are exposed by Clang in C as the `__int128` type.

# Detailed design
[design]: #detailed-design

## Compiler support

The first step for implementing this feature is to add support for the `i128`/`u128` primitive types to the compiler. This will requires changes to many parts of the compiler, from libsyntax to trans.

The compiler will need to be bootstrapped from an older compiler which does not support `i128`/`u128`, but rustc will want to use these types internally for things like literal parsing and constant propagation. This can be solved by using a "software" implementation of these types, similar to the one in the [extprim](https://github.com/kennytm/extprim) crate. Once stage1 is built, stage2 can be compiled using the native LLVM `i128`/`u128` types.

## Runtime library support

The LLVM code generator supports 128-bit integers on all architectures, however it will lower some operations to runtime library calls. This similar to how we currently handle `u64` and `i64` on 32-bit platforms: "complex" operations such as multiplication or division are lowered by LLVM backends into calls to functions in the `compiler-rt` runtime library.

Here is a rough breakdown of which operations are handled natively instead of through a library call:
- Add/Sub/Neg: native, including checked overflow variants
- Compare (eq/ne/gt/ge/lt/le): native
- Bitwise and/or/xor/not: native
- Shift left/right: native on most architectures (some use libcalls instead)
- Bit counting, parity, leading/trailing ones/zeroes: native
- Byte swapping: native
- Mul/Div/Mod: libcall (including checked overflow multiplication)
- Conversion to/from f32/f64: libcall

The `compiler-rt` library that comes with LLVM only implements runtime library functions for 128-bit integers on 64-bit platforms (`#ifdef __LP64__`). We will need to provide our own implementations of the relevant functions to allow `i128`/`u128` to be available on all architectures. Note that this can only be done with a compiler that already supports `i128`/`u128` to match the calling convention that LLVM is expecting.

Here is the list of functions that need to be implemented:

```rust
fn __ashlti3(a: i128, b: i32) -> i128;
fn __ashrti3(a: i128, b: i32) -> i128;
fn __divti3(a: i128, b: i128) -> i128;
fn __fixdfti(a: f64) -> i128;
fn __fixsfti(a: f32) -> i128;
fn __fixunsdfti(a: f64) -> u128;
fn __fixunssfti(a: f32) -> u128;
fn __floattidf(a: i128) -> f64;
fn __floattisf(a: i128) -> f32;
fn __floatuntidf(a: u128) -> f64;
fn __floatuntisf(a: u128) -> f32;
fn __lshrti3(a: i128, b: i32) -> i128;
fn __modti3(a: i128, b: i128) -> i128;
fn __muloti4(a: i128, b: i128, overflow: &mut i32) -> i128;
fn __multi3(a: i128, b: i128) -> i128;
fn __udivti3(a: u128, b: u128) -> u128;
fn __umodti3(a: u128, b: u128) -> u128;
```

Implementations of these functions will be written in Rust and will be included in libcore. Note that it is not possible to write these functions in C or use the existing implementations in `compiler-rt` since the `__int128` type is not available in C on 32-bit platforms.

## Modifications to libcore

Several changes need to be done to libcore:
- `src/libcore/num/i128.rs`: Define `MIN` and `MAX`.
- `src/libcore/num/u128.rs`: Define `MIN` and `MAX`.
- `src/libcore/num/mod.rs`: Implement inherent methods, `Zero`, `One`, `From` and `FromStr` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/num/wrapping.rs`: Implement methods for `Wrapping<u128>` and `Wrapping<i128>`.
- `src/libcore/fmt/num.rs`: Implement `Binary`, `Octal`, `LowerHex`, `UpperHex`, `Debug` and `Display` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/cmp.rs`: Implement `Eq`, `PartialEq`, `Ord` and `PartialOrd` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/nonzero.rs`: Implement `Zeroable` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/iter.rs`: Implement `Step` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/clone.rs`: Implement `Clone` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/default.rs`: Implement `Default` for `u128` and `i128`.
- `src/libcore/hash/mod.rs`: Implement `Hash` for `u128` and `i128` and add `write_i128` and `write_u128` to `Hasher`.
- `src/libcore/lib.rs`: Add the `u128` and `i128` modules.

## Modifications to libstd

A few minor changes are required in libstd:
- `src/libstd/lib.rs`: Re-export `core::{i128, u128}`.
- `src/libstd/primitive_docs.rs`: Add documentation for `i128` and `u128`.

## Modifications to other crates

A few external crates will need to be updated to support the new types:
- `rustc-serialize`: Add the ability to serialize `i128` and `u128`.
- `serde`: Add the ability to serialize `i128` and `u128`.
- `rand`: Add the ability to generate random `i128`s and `u128`s.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

One possible issue is that a `u128` can hold a very large number that doesn't fit in a `f32`. We need to make sure this doesn't lead to any `undef`s from LLVM. See [this comment](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/10185#issuecomment-110955148), and [this example code](https://gist.github.com/Amanieu/f87da5f0599b343c5500).

# Alternatives
[alternatives]: #alternatives

There have been several attempts to create `u128`/`i128` wrappers based on two `u64` values, but these can't match the performance of LLVM's native 128-bit integers. For example LLVM is able to lower a 128-bit add into just 2 instructions on 64-bit platforms and 4 instructions on 32-bit platforms.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

None
